
INSPIRATION

Wind is spontaneous and often unexpected. It can manifest as a slight breeze, or a powerful gale. It can move in many directions and as a focused force. It can gently spread the seeds of life, and be a fearful force of destruction. Wind can carry a message for miles, even around the world. Wind can be harnessed and turned into energy.

OVERVIEW

Wind is a new metaphor, backed by a collection of standardized behaviors, to promote the development and adoption of direct nearby-capable application, services and features, for smart devices. It builds upon the widespread availability through low cost smartphones of multiple local area radio communications technologies, such as WifiDirect, Bluetooth (Classic and LE) and NFC/RFID. Wind also promotes the use of camera and microphones a means of bootstrapping communication (a decentralized name service) through visual and audio identifiers, like QR codes and machine-decodable chirps. Finally, the use of sensor like GPS and accelerometers can help instrument and tune the network, improving routing and adding the ability to have geo-coded data as a component of the system.

While Wind-like or "nearby" features exist in mainstream applications today, they are largely proprietary and purpose built. Google Chromecast devices use a combination of technologies, including human inaudible tones, to enable the Chromecast device to be discovered and connected by the Chromecast app. Apple uses similar capabilities in its AirDrop feature to allow easy nearby discovery and file sharing. Firechat emerged on the global scene as the first broadly popular messaging app that attempted to create a chatroom like experience over WiFi and Bluetooth when the Internet wasn't available. All of these, and other uses, can be likened to the very popular dial-up services Prodigy, AOL, and Compuserve before the Web. They had the basic features of applications of the Web (email, news, encyclopedias, games) but without any opportunity for open, interoperable innovation outside of their corporate siloes.

Likewise, the Web was not a stack of code to be licensed. It was an idea of a network of hyperlinked media that had germanated for a long time, combined with a sensible, simple protocol and a functional implementation, all backed by real world experiences and needs. It also didn't truly find its legs until there were usable implementations, useful services and desirable content, all with a critical mass of users. The approach for Wind is attempting to emulate this successful model.

Wind might also be mistaken for a "mesh" system, a word which has consciously not been used in this text thus far. Mesh typically refers to fixed systems focused on routing Internet Protocol in a decentralized manner. It often is seen as a means to get people online (meaning connected to the Internet and Web) when more traditional or expected services provided by governments and telecommunications providers are not available. Mesh systems are rarely spontaneous, as they can be complicated to setup for reliable use. Once a mesh IP is established, many applications don't work as well as expected because they believe they are on a more traditional IP network. There are mesh systems that are asynchronous and message-oriented, but they are generally used for closed systems or with closely coordinated participants. Mesh definitely has its place, but it is not what Wind is.

